.\" Manpage for SVFINDER.
.TH man 7 "04 sept. 2012" "1.0" "TE-Tracker"
.SH NAME
TE-Tracker \- detects transposition events in whole genomes
.SH SYNOPSIS
TE-Tracker 
.B [eris|leto|metis|run|man] [OPTIONS...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
TE-Tracker is a tool designed to detect and annotate transposition events from sequence alignments, based on discordant pair detection. Its input is a standard BAM file, typically generated by an aligner such as BWA. The TE-Tracker script in itself is a wrapper for three different programs, which can also be run separately. The first one, Eris.pl, performs all preprocessing steps such as BAM file modification and filtering, as well as detect the discordant pairs themselves. The second one, Leto.pl, prepares the files for single linkage clustering (SLC) and runs the said algorithm. The last one, Metis.pl, performs all additional post-processing steps, such as donor-scoring and annotation. This page only documents the TE-Tracker pipeline as a whole, please see the help for each program for further details.
.SH FEATURES
TE-Tracker allows you to detect translocations as well as insertions and deletions in an aligned sequencing output. Typically, the TE-Tracker user will want to detect transposition events that occurred during the sequenced individual's drift from another of which you posess a reference sequence. TE-Tracker is able to detect the donor and acceptor region for each event. If there is an ambiguity in the donor, it will display all alternative donors for a given acceptor; a basic scoring system is implemented in order to help discriminating them. The program is pipelined, and the elements itself are fully customizable, allowing you to easily add and modify steps. TE-Tracker is able to perform donor annotation.
.SH REQUIREMENTS
The basic installment of TE-Tracker will need a recent version of the following programs: Samtools, java and Picard-tools. If you are planning on annotating the results, you will also need a version of BEDtools. 
A version of Perl >= 5.10 is required, with the following libraries installed: Getopt::Long, POSIX, Switch, List::Util, Devel::Peek, Time::HiRes.
.SH CONFIGURATION FILE
All options except 
.B -bam
and
.B -out 
are discretionary. If they are not specified at runtime, TE-Tracker will look for the TE-Tracker.conf configuration file in the binary directory and will fetch the parameter values from there. If no configuration file is found, default values will be left to the three individual programs to decide. The file has its own documentation in the form of comments, and is divided in several sections. The
.B [GLOBAL]
section allows you to specify parameters that are inherent to your environment, such as the base location of TE-Tracker, your RMS system, e.a. The three sections 
.B [PREPROCESSING]
, 
.B [CLUSTERING]
and
.B [POSTPROCESSING]
comprise two variables, 
.I binary
and
.IR default_params .
The first is used to specify what program will be called at each step, and the second with what parameters. This structure allows you to replace TE-Tracker executables with your own modified scripts. However, be aware that TE-Tracker will try to transmit a certain number of fixed parameters, that your programs should accept by default. See the mandatory parameters for each step in the eris.pl, leto.pl and metis.pl man pages.



.SH OPTIONS
There are two ways to run TE-Tracker. It is possible to call each of the individual programs manually, in which case all the supplementary arguments you provide will be transmitted to the subprogram you choose to invoke. It is also possible to pipeline the execution of all three programs using the 
.B run
argument, whose only parameter is a configuration file containing all necessary options for each stage of the program.


.SS Subprograms summary
.TP 20

.BI "eris " "[OPTIONS...]"
Performs various filtering options, detects discordant reads and generates concordant/discordant BAM files.
.TP 
.BI "leto " "[OPTIONS...]"
Clusters reads and calls transposition events.

.TP
.BI "metis " "[OPTIONS...]"
Annotates and performs donor scoring.

.TP
.BI "run " [config_file]
The coverage value above which the region is considered "high-covered" and ignored from analysis. Defaults to 20000.

.TP
.BI man
This manual.

.SS "eris.pl parameters"
.IR -ext ,
.IR -maxcov,
.IR -covext ,
.IR -read ,
.IR -dm ,
.IR -sm ,
.IR -sample ,
.IR -nosort ,
.IR -concordant ,
.IR -discordant ,
.IR -treat_bam ,
.IR -mock ,
.IR -rundata ,
.IR -maxmap ,
.IR -maxmis ,
.IR -nodiscordant ,
.IR -chainload ,
.I -f1

Please refer to the eris.pl manpage.
.SS "leto.pl parameters"
.IR -clustering-parameters ,
.I -minreads
Please refer to the leto.pl manpage.
.SS "metis.pl parameters"
.IR -nosort ,
.IR -annotate ,
.I -score_donors

Please refer to the metis.pl manpage.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP 
tetracker run Arabidopsis.conf
.TP 
tetracker eris -bam data.sorted.rmdup.bam -out temp -nodiscordant -treat_bam=input:0-1 -chainload=treated
.TP 
tetracker leto -in temp/ -out temp/ -method=markov,data.sorted.rmdup.bam
.TP 
tetracker eris -bam input.0-1.mismatch.sorted.bam -nosort input.0-1.mismatch.ReadOrder.bam -out temp -nodiscordant -discordant=sorted
.TP 
tetracker metis -discordant temp/discordant.sorted.bam -in temp/ -out temp/ reference=reference.fa -score_donors -annotate -acc_annot=genes.bed -donor_annot=TE.bed

.SH SEE ALSO
leto.pl(7), eris.pl(7), metis.pl(7)
.SH BUGS
No known bugs.
.SH AUTHOR
Arthur L.  Gilly (ag15@sanger.ac.uk), Mohammed-Amin Madoui, Jean-Marc Aury
